---
layout: post
title: "Silicon Valley vs. Democracy"
date: 2016-02-20 12:00 -0500
---

**Writing practice. I believe all this stuff, but it's kind of a diatribe.**

**tldr; Silicon Valley? Actually it's bad.**


Silicon Valley (SV) ideals are dominant in US culture right now, and they’re filtering out into the rest of the world as well. These ideals consist of an amalgam of conservative/libertarian principles like meritocracy, market fundamentalism, the primacy of self, a veneration of grit and will in the pursuit of wealth, an obsession with efficiency, and major skepticism toward collective or public projects, all smashed together with some often contradictory liberal platitudes about pluralism and inclusivity, an inclination toward the worship of youth, and the conviction that technology and automation are “making the world a better place.” (Yes, but for who?) In other words, a shell of liberal aesthetics surrounds a core of conservatism.

I argue that when put into practice, this ideology lends a hand not to “progress” (a word whose meaning has become vague and distorted) but to the creation and defense of powerful anti-democratic institutions, and that the rise of SV ideology is one facet of a historic rightward shift in world economic politics commonly named “neoliberalism” (at least by its critics.  Its apologists just call it “realistic centrism,” “practical politics” or something similar that rings of benignity and incontestable common sense). I also contend that a critique of this increasingly dominant strain of political thinking from the perspective of a radical democratic politics is desperately needed but largely absent from popular discourse.

It’s beyond the scope of this essay and my own knowledge to completely trace the origins and lineage of the SV ideology, also called “the Californian Ideology” or “cyberlibertarianism” in some scholarship. In practice it means opposing any government intervention into private transactions, with a special focus on technology, which is seen as particularly radical and liberative. A technology “revolution” in recent decades supposedly has imbued individuals with unprecedented freedom and power, and for public institutions to encroach on this newly carved out space is considered an unforgivable curtailment of individual free expression. Indeed, it is usually cast as authoritarian coercion on the level with state censorship.  See for example the rhetoric deployed in opposition to SOPA and PIPA, regulatory policies which intended more or less to pick sides in a turf battle between two powerful sectors of the tech economy: “content producers” like Google, Netflix, et al. (though content middlemen is perhaps a better term) and internet infrastructure corporations like Comcast and Verizon. In the end, the cyberlibertarians (those supporting the content producers) prevailed, likely due in no small part to major SV lobbying efforts in recent years, but also to the rhetorical success of their ideas in mobilizing a community of tech businesses and hackers of various stripes into a vocal political faction. Absent from discussion around these issues is any serious radical democratic opposition to both sides, i.e. no one was saying, “Maybe neither Google nor Verizon should control the country’s technology infrastructure!”

From an egalitarian, radical democratic perspective, the results of applying SV principles are disastrous. They are often socially destructive and at odds with their stated intent of enhancing liberty and quality of life (“progress”). Consider that in San Francisco (SF), the epicenter of technocapitalism, a “reasonable” rent for a one-bedroom apartment might be $8000/month. Many of SF’s new residents can afford this (some of them easily!) having been enriched by the tech boom. Many long time residents cannot, and will be displaced. This kind of gentrification is not a new phenomenon by any means, but the enormity of the imbalance is novel, and is but one aspect of a massive wealth disparity that has been wrought by unimpeded capital accumulation in the tech industry. To a market fundamentalist, there is nothing wrong with this. The tech millionaire simply got what he deserved – immense wealth and the privilege to live in a highly desirable city, while the poor immigrant or the waitress with an English degree got what they deserved – precarious or nonexistent employment, basic needs precariously met or not net, and pushed out of the new elite cultural enclave (though perhaps allowed back in during the day to perform service jobs at subsistence wages; somebody has to pour the $20 whiskeys). To libertarians, this situation is freedom, not exploitation.

Of course the effects are not limited to the physical locality of San Francisco. These ideas shape the way we relate to technology, government, each other, our employers and importantly they shape they way we conceive of progress and history. In a recent essay extolling the virtues of income inequality, tech billionaire Paul Graham admonishes readers who might support redistributive anti-poverty policies. He describes an “exponential curve” representing the natural course of history and the “acceleration of productivity.” “You do not want to design your society in a way that’s incompatible with this curve,” he says.  Leaving aside the technocratic tendency to cast every problem as a math problem with a technical solution, there is a very important libertarian presumption about politics and markets embedded in that statement, and it is a core proposition of the overall ideology – that there are natural laws beyond human control which govern our political economy, and we violate them at our peril. To implement a living wage guarantee is to violate a natural law. To form collective political bodies that represent worker interests, to legislate against corporations in the interest of human dignity, to restrict the flows of capital in any way is to violate natural law. Cyberlibertarians entreat us to think of the “acceleration of productivity” as some kind of extra-historical force, another natural phenomenon. It seems the best we can do is to struggle to keep up with it.

Perhaps this sense of ceaseless acceleration (promoted as “progress,” whatever progress is), is related to the fact that working Americans at all income levels now work longer hours, report high work-related stress, and take prescription anti-anxiety drugs at unprecedented levels.  Perversely, even though worker productivity has accelerated massively in recent decades as a function of better technology and automation, the average worker’s days are busier with less time for leisure, contra the Keynesian prediction of a 15-hour work week. We also feel a reduction in autonomy in the forms of employer surveillance and a work day that bleeds over into a shriveling personal life. On-call time, work emails arriving after hours and on weekends with the expectation of being answered, fierce intra-workplace competition, etc. are now being normalized, a trend driven by the tech industry. The famous August 2015 [New York Times exposé](http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/16/technology/inside-amazon-wrestling-big-ideas-in-a-bruising-workplace.html) of Amazon’s corporate culture reifies these conditions. Another exposé by Mother Jones surveys the conditions in the attendant shipping warehouses for Amazon and similar enterprises, revealing abhorrent working conditions where endless speedups and quota increases, long hours, terrible pay, little dignity and constant reminders by management of their jobs’ precarity were utterly normal for workers. All along the supply chain, “acceleration” means “work harder.” And as workers, we do not reap the benefits of acceleration, the owners of capital do. But again, to a Silicon Valley idealist, this situation is freedom, not exploitation.

This version of “progress” is technological acceleration as a brutal, unappeasable taskmaster, from which workers cannot escape, where all the productivity gains are realized by the rentier class, not by the people doing work. In the libertarian formulation, we must accept these conditions, because to resist is to resist the laws of nature! It’s just the “fast-paced world we’re living in,” we’re told by our bosses and by thousands of PR departments from corporations around the globe, by billboards and banner ads selling accounting software and “enterprise solutions,” etc. Everywhere we look we’re reminded that the world is “fast-paced” now. From the perspective of radical democracy, none of this is appealing. What then, is a reasonable alternative?

To some critics, a retreat from technology is called for. This is a common attitude among exponents of the environmental justice movements, e.g. “We need to get back to nature.” While I share in their critique of the existing structures and dominant ideology, I don’t think we can or would actually want to “get back to nature.” Instead, the goal of radical democratic politics ought to be to wrest control of fundamental technologies from entrenched oligarchs and to allow them to be democratically controlled, to treat core technologies which are currently private as public goods like other aspects of public infrastructure, and to reassert democratic control over the conditions of the workplace.

 This is of course quite a radical prospect and one which would be impossible without attaching to a broader radical political program of some kind or other, the likes of which have never really existed in the US. However, as the US and the world become more wealth-polarized and the wreckage of austerity politics takes its toll, people may start to look at their political-economic situation with a more skeptical eye. At some point simply repeating the Silicon Valley bromides about changing the world through code and rising tides lifting all boats will not suffice in the face of our contrary lived experience. A rising tide may lift all boats, but if you don’t have a boat, you’re still going to drown. If we can repurpose technological capital for the public good, it would have enormous real transformative and revolutionary potential. Keynes’s 15-hour work week is more than achievable with existing technology, it’s simply not desirable for those currently in power. Under a democratized system, much of the tedious and outright pointless work we do today could be automated away or simply eliminated, leaving us truly free to enrich our lives, explore our world, care for ourselves and our loved ones, and in general to live far more decently and humanely. Democratization offers a far brighter future than the “economic freedom” to yoke yourself to a tech company and buy flashy gadgets. We must fight for a democratic future, not a techno-libertarian one.
